Well, once again, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray.
It's April 19th, 2019, and this is Ask Your Herb Doctor. KMUD Garville 91.1 FM proudly hosts this
free speech independent radio program that we do the third Friday of every month. And from 6.30
until 7 o'clock, callers are invited to call with questions either related to this month's
continuing topic of antiviral herbs, and we're going to break into nanoparticles and their
health effects, negative health effects, and also looking a little more at some other articles
surrounding polyunsaturated fats and cancer incidence. So that'll be something we'll bring
out here. The tide is slowly changing and slowly turning, and as Dr. Peat has said and has been
famously quoted in the past, "A lie gets around the world quicker than truth can tie up her shoelaces."
So once again, we're very welcome to have Dr. Peat join us on the radio show live. You there, Dr. Peat?
Yes, hello. Thanks so much for joining us. I just first wanted to start a very brief introduction
into some of the things that we're going to cover again this evening, which is a kind of follow-up
from the last couple of months that we haven't finished, but I won't dwell too great length on
it. The antiviral activity of selected medicinal plants for which there are plenty of articles.
If you look at PubMed, for example, you can type in the Latin name of a plant and type in
"antiviral activity" and you can get a host of search results that will come back with
clinical trials that have been done on that plant for that known virus, whether it's herpes or
hepatitis or whatever. So whilst we know that the source of this information may not be
fully accurate, as is always the case with everything, PubMed is one of those places that
does supposedly publish, you know, reviewed articles and like ResearchGate and other
affiliates, is at this point, I think, probably one of the only real avenues that we have to look
for the results that we hope are not skewed and tell the facts like they are. I know I've
interviewed Dr. Peat and many times he's quoted supposedly scientific research articles that are
nothing of the sort and has pointed out blatant errors in the research and has put the record
straight. I think before I carry on, I would like to get you, Dr. Peat, just to introduce yourself
to people who maybe haven't heard of you before, though I think your fame is spreading around the
world. But if you just outline your academic and professional background for people that have maybe
not heard of you before, and also, like I've said, you know, all of these programs will be
on an Instagram page and we'll be doing a fairly intensive Ray Peat based ideology Instagram page
for people to find all of the information that you've been talking about rather than
recapitulated from various websites that are purporting to be Dr. Peat friendly, some of which
suggesting things that I know you wouldn't suggest. So just for people listening tonight,
it's April 2019 here now and hopefully in the next two months or so we'll have an opening
Instagram page and we're going to chronologically as well as by subject matter list it in a logical
sequence for people to educate themselves from the very beginning of your work, Dr. Peat,
which was on polyunsaturates and thyroid and hormones. But anyway, enough of me. Would you
just introduce yourself? Between 1968 and 72, I studied biology, emphasizing physiology,
especially reproductive physiology at the University of Oregon. But I didn't start
academic study of biology until I had about 20 years of investigating controversies in biology and
having decided that academic biology, especially in the US, was too dogmatic and commercial
to really be scientific. But I finally decided to go through the academic process and find out
some of its weaknesses in the process. And after getting a PhD, I discontinued my independent
studying, doing nutrition counseling, hormone counseling, and studying how the brain,
reproductive and immune systems in particular, interact with the environment, especially
nutrition. You've been a big proponent for a long time now of getting people to stop
using polyunsaturates, quoting Burr and other people who had previously studied this and were
supporting it in the mid-30s or 40s and from there on. And you've always mentioned the fact that the
paint industry was a big user of these vegetable oils and that when the petroleum industry came
into being, synthetic additives and paints were then manufactured from petroleum and put the
seed oil producers at risk. And so they decided to put these seed oils into the food chain.
And for a long, long time now, as I grew up in the 70s, the polyunsaturates and the sunflower oil and
everything else was margarine, it was just advertised everywhere as the heart-healthy
wonder oil. And the things that our forebears had used, very natural products like saturated
fat from beef, these kinds of things, animal fats and animal products even, largely.
A big study in veterans of the heart-healthy diet with margarine found that it not only
caused more cancer, but also increased deaths from heart disease. And that was a turning point
against the original essential fatty acids and that set the background for fish oil to come on
the market. Yeah, okay. Well, I think probably, if this is not the order, I was going to ask you
some questions related to things from antiviral components in medicinal herbs that you probably
have read about and you would understand and be able to elucidate somewhat from your perspective
of how they work, especially those we've talked about in the past, the dark pigments, the anthocyanin
pigments that you have described as being radical quenching because they have the ability to mop up
electrons and suppress inflammation and that kind of thing. But let me just, and I didn't send
any of this to you, but I read this article, it just came out of the blue as I was looking at
articles to support a negative detrimental effect from polyunsaturates because,
gosh, you type in polyunsaturates and all you find is how good they are, how healthy they are,
how cardiovascular friendly they are, how you can't live without them and how you'd be crazy
not to use them. So there's a strength pushed in the industry weighed on the pro-polyunsaturates
side that it's very difficult to find evidence for the opposite. But I came across this article
and it's entitled "Are diets high in omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids unhealthy?"
and this came out of work that was done at the University Hadassah Medical School in Jerusalem
and it said that, just I want to quote a small paragraph from it and then we'll carry on
in the order that I think we were going to do this subject in with antivirals and then move on to
nanotechnology as an emerging potential problem. But anyway, it said that in the introduction,
and I am quoting the introduction here, so for people that might even come across this article,
yeah, it's plagiarism in some ways, but I just want to directly quote the article.
It said, "Israel has one of the highest dietary polyunsaturated to saturated fat ratios in the
world. The population consumes some 8% more omega-6 PUFAs than in the USA and some 10 to 12%
more than in most European countries. Israeli Jews may be regarded as a population-based dietary
experiment of the effect of a high omega-6 PUFA diet on disease, one of which until recently was
widely recommended. Despite such national habits, paradoxically there is a high prevalence of
cardiovascular diseases from hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus,
and obesity, all diseases which are associated with hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance,
and grouped together as the insulin-resistant syndrome or syndrome X. There is also an
increased cancer incidence and mortality rate, especially in women, in comparison with Western
countries. Studies suggest that high linoleic acid consumption might aggravate hyperinsulinemia
and insulin resistance, as well as being a substrate for lipid peroxidation and free
radical formation, which I know you've mentioned extensively. Thus far from being beneficial,
high omega-6 PUFA diets may have some serious long-term effects, acting as the link between
hyperinsulinemia, atherosclerosis, and carcinogenesis. So what do you think of that article?
Very good.
So you've got to search. I don't know if it's had any bearing on the search results, folks,
and I don't want you to interpret what I'm going to say as just the way that's evidence of it,
but I was using Startpage as my browser and increasingly going off Google, which I think
obviously has become de facto for a lot of people just because it's so ubiquitous, but I truly
believe, and this is my own personal opinion, that Google are streamlining results based on
search terms that suit their agenda, folks. A couple of sociologists recently did a study
on Google-like search engine, and they slightly jiggered the frequency of particular names of
political candidates. They thought they might be able to rig the choice in an election by two or
three percent. It turned out they were getting a 48 percent false result just by which name they
favored with the search engine. Very horrifying about what Google could be doing.
Absolutely, and this mirrors what I said very early on in the beginning of that,
that you have to be careful where you get your results from because even published medical data
is skewed and it's abused and data is misinterpreted or downright corrected in favor
of the results they're looking for. And so it is with the internet as well. I mean, it is paradoxical
that there's a wealth of information out there, but you've really got to be careful that now I
think the information increasingly so is becoming manipulated by the main players in the world of
the internet, you know, in terms of search engine results, and that's Google. Obviously, there are
other players, but Google is one of the biggest, and certainly becoming a bone to contend with in
terms of being objective about where you're getting your information from without being on the fact
checking side of paranoia. There is definitely a weight of evidence to show that a lot of the
search terms are being manipulated in terms of algorithms that are produced by these companies to
either show or hide results that you would normally find. But anyway, so the start page
came up with this and it was at the end of the day, and I didn't even have time, Dr. Peate,
to put this into any kind of introduction for the show and the questions, but I thought that
was quite interesting. I'll probably take a look at some start page search terms in terms of PUFA
and its negative effects, because like I said, you generally just find all the positive stuff on.
Okay, so you've talked about naringenin before several times in different contexts as
antioxidant. Do you, and I don't know that you do, I'm just putting it out there that perhaps you've
have a way of explaining naringenin's potential antiviral effects, because I know that there are
quite a few studies that are showing naringenin as a preparation for herpes simplex virus being
fairly effective and not knowing as much perhaps as you do about naringenin and its activity. I
wondered if you'd know anything that would support that? Oh yeah, I think it works the same way
as aspirin and progesterone and all of the cell stabilizers work. It increases the oxidative
balance of the cell, simply reinforcing the effect of the oxidative respiratory metabolism,
and that makes the cell able to resist improper excitation, stabilizes it against random
irritation, and just about anything that is unphysiological will destabilize the cell in the
same direction. So these things protect against viruses, radiation, vibration, oxygen deprivation,
sugar deprivation, too much of the polyunsaturated fats, and too much phosphate, too little calcium,
just anything that shifts the balance towards meaningless excitation or reducing
proper energy production. Okay, so this is a cell stabilizing component,
which also has an antiviral effect because of its energy saving effect rather than allowing
the cell to become excited and in an exciter toxic way, wasting energy and being unstable.
Yeah, when the virus wants to replicate, it excites the cell, gets the cell churning its
mechanism and that damages the organism, produces more viruses. Yeah. Okay, so there's naringenin,
that was that one, and mainly oranges and lemons, the peel, but I found actually there was a greater
proportion of naringenin actually in the membrane. So this is that kind of white pithy membrane that
you'll find either in between the segments of the fruit or just underneath the surface of the skin.
So you're listening to Ask Urib, Dr. K. M. E. D. Garboville, 91.1 FM,
from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock. You're invited to call in our guest speaker,
Dr. Raymond Peat, covering a few antiviral herbs before we get into the subject of particulates,
especially the nanoparticulates and nanotechnology. The number here is area code 707-9233911.
Okay, then I guess I'll very quickly just mention, because I don't see too much
conclusive evidence here, but hemidesmus, which was Indian sarsaparilla, I saw a few articles there
about its herpes simplex 1 and 2 activity, but then I wanted to mention pomegranate. I think
this is a fairly ancient fruit that's been mentioned since biblical times, and an article
that mentioned the effect of zinc in conjunction with pomegranate rind extract being eight times
greater in its viricidal activity than an equivalent mass of just purely pomegranate extract.
I would understand the pomegranate again to being fairly antioxidant, as I think that's the main
reason it's juiced and sold as its potential health benefits. But from the point of view of
the ion zinc, I think it has been used, it obviously uses a sun blocker, and I think zinc
on its own has been touted as a healing agent for speeding up the healing process in cold sores.
Do you have anything to say on zinc or what you've heard or read before that would support
any activity there? I think the protein synthesizing function of zinc is like vitamin A
for accelerating healing. So the protein synthesizing effect, and this would be why it
would be used in the production of sperm? Yeah. Interesting. Okay. All right. And then
something that I'd have a kind of personal relationship with, if you like, between this
one and the next one is birch bark extract. And I had an article that was published by the
University of Medicine and Pharmacy in Romania on betulin. And betulin and betulinic acid
were two ingredients that were used for this and had some pretty good results with it in treating
melanomas and colon and cervical cancer. And this study seemed to show here that the
double staining analysis that was conducted on the cells after they were treated
measured the activity of the cell enzymes which were responsible for angiogenesis. And this was
the rationale by which the extract had a anti-cancer effect was that it directly
interfered with angiogenesis and creation of new blood vessels. Structurally, betulinic acid is
analogous to progesterone. And it's a triterpene, isn't it? Sarsaparilla, I think, has a similar
steroid. Okay. Yeah. They call it a pentacyclic triterpene. Interesting. Okay. So they had this
trial of X amount of people. And they said that it was fairly significant, its effects. And so
they were calling out birch bark as a good source of betulinic acid and production of betulin.
And there was one other tree, another tree actually, was the red alder. And they said also
that Native Americans use the bark of the red alder tree to treat a variety of inflammatory
conditions from poison oak to other inflammatory skin conditions as well as TB. Okay. So that's
birch bark. And I want to just mention here briefly, and I'm doing a kind of trial myself,
I know when we spoke maybe two months ago about skin cancers, I had, actually, it was the beginning
of the year, wasn't it? With Simoncini, the Italian doctor here who had, you know, a bunch
of YouTube channels talking about iodine and his belief that there was a fungal origin of cancer,
or especially candida as an origin of cancers, and that iodine's use was implicated in treating that
because of its antifungal effect. So I got a product from Australia. And in Australia,
there has been probably for about 20 years now, a patented herb-based product for skin cancer.
And it works for both actinic keratosis, which is a kind of pre-cancerous, it's called a cancer,
but it's a pre-cancerous lesion. Then obviously the basal and squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma.
So this particular plant is a solanaceous plant, so belonging to the tomato family,
called Solanum sodomasium. There are other solanums that do have these solacidine glycosides.
Aubergine is one of them. And I have a herbalist in England. He's about 82. I met his daughter
while we were studying. She's like a second generation herbalist there. But anyway,
he produces this cream. He bases on both aubergine and birch bark.
And we call aubergine eggplant. Eggplant. Okay, there you go. So for
those people that are listening, I'm talking about the eggplant. So anyway,
both the aubergine and this Solanum sodomasium both contain Solamargine.
And these are the glycosides that are attached, actually, rhamnose sugars that are attached
to this Solamargine and directly kill cancer cells specifically and leave normal cells intact.
And so he's actually patented this. I think it was a biochemistry doctor.
And 25 years ago, he patented this product and it's been sold all over the world. And you can
go on the website and you can, I think it's about 60 to 65% effective. It's not 100% effective 100%
of the time. But there's quite a lot of anecdotal evidence there from people that have used it.
And they've got nothing but good things to say about it. So anyway, I wanted to mention that I
had on my forearms from sun damage, what I believe, but again, this is anecdotal for me, I never had a
biopsy taken to tell me that it was cancerous or precancerous, but definitely these raised,
you know, irregular, bordered, pearly gray, sinister looking skin lesions that I just,
and I used 7% iodine on them. And the results from both of that are that after about 60 days,
they totally gone. So it took about 60 days. But I've no visible sign of anything left there that
was there previously. And I'll keep an eye on it to see how it goes. But at the same time,
I purchased this Curidone from Australia and I've been using that on what I have on the bridge of
my nose, which I've had probably for a couple of years, has just stubbornly resisted any and
everything I put on it. But it's unequivocal at this point in time, because the results are still
waiting. And so Dr. Peat, in terms of cancers and skin cancers, especially, I know it's a little
bit of a touchy subject from a global warming perspective, you know, if the planet's heating
up or if we're losing our ozone layer. But cancers are definitely on the rise. And I think before we
get into the rapid increase in cancer incidences, and we have some facts and analysis from a few
departments that have done studies on this, in terms of cancer and skin cancer, do you have
a way of defining it or a way that you would understand it outside of, you know, the regular
kind of sunburn causing genetic changes type approach? You know, that's...
Oh, for melanoma, sun really isn't the main factor. Most melanomas occur in
areas that aren't much exposed to the sun, back and inside of the thighs, even on the bottom of
the feet. And it's a very hormone sensitive thing. Estrogen has been suspected for a long time of
being involved in it. I've seen dozens of apparent melanomas that disappeared. A couple of people who
were diagnosed with terminal melanoma, a very advanced metastatic, it regressed when they
changed their diet, used coffee, aspirin, and various nutritional things, vitamin D,
a lot of orange juice and milk and such. Is this an anti-estrogenic type approach in that you're...
Yeah. And so far, all of the melanoma people that I've talked to have had a really quick
response from changing their diet. Interesting. Okay. Have you come across many people yourself
that have had, I don't know, either actinic keratosis or basal or squamous cell carcinomas
that have been treated effectively without any medical intervention? Yeah. The first one I saw,
man, about 80, 45 years ago, put progesterone on his diagnosed lip cancer. Okay. And in a week or
so, it was gone. Interesting. Okay. We'll be coming up to 730 here. So just to remind people again,
this is AskYourOvDoctor, 91.1 KM UD, 91.1 FM, and the number is 707-923-3911.
I got your recent newsletter, Dr. Peat, and I have definitely wondered about it myself,
as like everything else, whenever you tamper with nature, things usually don't go too well.
Obviously, there are some cases where we interfere with things and hopefully make them better.
But nature does a pretty good job of selecting out the good from the bad. And I think we've
gotten where we are because of its job doing that. So nanotechnology is a rapidly progressing
science, a little bit like CRISPR gene editing. I think it's got the same kind of mystique and
similar kind of fears surrounding it. It's found in many different products. It's not just something
that builds nanotubules, for example, to promote ultra light strong structure, but it's put in
skin creams. It's added to foods. I got an article that I don't have to read at this point in time,
because I'd like to get your feedback on the whole nanotech industry and where you see it
causing problems and what you think would be the right approach to its development. And it's,
you know, coming into being a part of our science and not getting away from us like a Pandora's box
opening. But what's your opinion on nanotechnology, where it's come from and how fast it's moving?
I'm not sure exactly where the industry came from. People have recognized that particles like soot
spontaneously makes these highly structured ultramicroscopic particles.
The industry, I think about 30 or 40 years after they recognized that these things were happening,
they thought up things to do with them. About 35 years ago, I had some contact with the
chemical industry and without asking for it, they sent me two gallon sized containers that
weighed almost nothing, a sample of their products that they wanted to promote. I screwed the top off
one of them and the material floated out like smoke. It was fumed silica, which is now being
added to toothpaste and can be included in foods. It makes salad dressings seem more creamy.
How long ago was this?
35 years ago.
Anyway, it worried me that the stuff floats right into the air. It's dangerous to be around.
I closed it up and set it aside. I didn't know how to dispose of it in an ecologically safe way.
The stuff can get into groundwater. Things of that sort are produced naturally by friction,
tires on the highway, and smoke coming out of engines.
Right, diesel engines.
Yeah, so it's something being produced by ordinary processes of industry and social activities,
but they're deliberately manufacturing it in vast amounts and thinking of new ways to
make clothing, deodorant, antiseptic, control heat and moisture better.
But these particles, even in clothes, the fine particles, if they contact sweaty skin,
actually can pass through the skin into the bloodstream in small amounts.
Interesting. You mentioned soot, and that just reminds me of the chimney sweeps in the
late 1800s in England. They would get testicular cancer. It was a well-known
result. So that's funny that you mentioned that. I mean, soot is
an ultra-fine nanoparticle in its own right, huh?
Yeah, and it contains estrogenic as well as carcinogenic chemicals. But the particles
themselves, because of their shape and size, the reason asbestos is carcinogenic
is its fine-pointed crystalline structure. And more or less spherical particles,
if they're as small as the point of an asbestos crystal, the body interprets the...
I think it's probably related to viral immune processes. It starts an inflammatory process
when the particle has a certain fineness or length to diameter ratio. A sharp particle or
a very small particle activates the inflammatory process, which excites a whole system of the cell
in the activity, which if you have the biological energy, you can segregate, isolate, and tamp down
that excitation and recover. But when it becomes either too frequent, too intense,
or your energy level decreases, the balance shifts towards inflammation, degeneration,
production of fibrous tissues rather than functional tissues.
Interesting. I came across an article that was put out by the National University of Singapore,
and the phenomena, they called it "nanomaterial-induced endothelial leakiness" or
"nano-L" for short. They had recorded the fact that this nano-L process accelerated the movement
of cancer cells from the primary tumor and also caused circulating cancer cells to escape from
the circulatory system. Because these nanoparticles created a gap physically within the
endothelia large enough for cells to come in and out of, so thus evading what would normally be a
host immune response within the vasculature. They physically were able to leak out of these spaces,
and so that was one direct way in which nanoparticles had been implicated in causing
cancer. Most of the places are talking about gaps between cells, but that leakiness, it's really
a basic thing that excess excitation or energy deficiency causes to happen in all cells,
that the substance of the cell leaks out. In a hypothyroid person, for example, if you exercise
the muscle too much, it leaks its enzymes right through the surface of the cell, and
particles, relatively big particles on the scale of these nanomaterials of the cell emit its own
nanoparticles right through the surface of the cell when it's stressed. The leakiness is an
intrinsic property of the cytoplasm when it's under stress, but they talk about it in terms of
gaps because they have a membrane barrier. It's mechanistic again, isn't it? I keep having to
check myself every time I talk to you, you come up with this and it's, yep, okay, the textbooks
interpret this physiologically one way because that's the way they want you to remember it,
that's the way they want to teach it and propagate it, but that is a much more fluid dynamic system
that's in place rather than this rigid mechanistic, you know, lock and key type approach that they've
always stuck by. Just giving the cell glucose to get its energy up can stop that leakiness,
and one of the interesting things about cancer, the tumors, instead of looking at
what's inside the cancer cell, someone looked at what's outside of the cells in a tumor. They found
there was a thousand times more ATP in the fluid of a tumor than in normal tissues. The cells are
leaky and they're leaking their necessary materials so fast that they are constantly in this
over-simulated condition. This would be an energy depleted state too, right? Yeah.
They're losing their basic building block for energy production. Interesting. Okay, so you're
listening to Ask U. I'm Dr. K. M. D. Galbavool, 91.1 FM. From now until the end of the show,
you're invited to call in. The number is 707-923-3911, and if we don't hear from you,
which would be very unusual, I would just imagine that you're listening. Anyway, so Dr. Peat,
in terms of an anti-inflammatory strategy for life, I know you've mentioned many substances which
many people that we've worked with have changed their diet and their lifestyle,
but in terms of energy, it's really everything that you've touched on this evening in these
different subjects is based on an energy-wasting perspective that causes cancer and that the
leakiness of a cell, for example, could be based on inflammatory mediators like estrogen and how
energy-wasteful an estrogenic environment is. This is quite probably why, and I'm totally sold on the
whole thyroid thing, because the fundamental basis of human life is energy. Everything in the universe
is energy. I'm not being flippant or braggadocious or anything, but energy is the sum basis of
everything that we see, do, and see. So thyroid hormone and glucose strike me as the two biggest
fuels, substances that promote energy because the whole process of ATP and muscular movement,
for example, requires glucose splitting to drive the whole Krebs cycle and produce energy. So
when the thyroid hormone is low or it's compromised because of blocks to its production or uptake or
synthesis, then naturally the organism is going to get weaker and there's going to come a point where
you exceed the ability to put up with that and then you start getting into a diseased state.
The engineer's got his finger up and he's got his finger up for a reason.
Okay, we have a caller. Let's get this next caller on the air. Caller, where are you from and what's
your question? I'm from Redway and my question is, would you please go over the information
about the Australian herbal topical cream for acne keratosis once again and can it be obtained
online? Yeah, okay. So the product is called Curaderm, C-U-R-A-D-E-R-M, Curaderm, and it's
trademarked, it's patented, and yes, you can get it online. There's several different outlets,
but the place that I did get it from was from Australia, but I think there are several European
outlets for it. So that's what you want to type in and you'll find that information online,
no problem. Thank you very much. Yeah, you're welcome. Okay, so we have another caller on the
air. Caller, you're on the air and where are you from? What's your question? Hello, I'm in Eureka.
Eureka, welcome to the show. Thank you. I've got questions about Parkinson's. Okay.
What is kind of a good direction to take, go with that? Okay, do you have a radio on in the
background at all? No, I have... All right, it's just a little bit of feedback. Okay,
so your main question is Parkinson's and the best way forward with Parkinson's?
Yes. Yeah, so Dr. Peat, Parkinson's, I know it's multifactorial and what they call Parkinson's now,
I've also seen recent research showing that it's actually multifactorial, the
neurofibrillary tangles and all the rest of the physiological findings, sometimes
they're way before the symptoms and actually they're now wanting to break it down into
five or six different causative organisms that could be responsible. But what's your view on
Parkinson's? Keeping testosterone and related steroids up, the neurosteroids are very protective
and testosterone has just been identified as one thing that goes down in relation to Parkinson's,
but the pregnenolone, progesterone, DHEA, and testosterone are all nerve protective
and restorative. Vitamin D is another steroid that is extremely protective to the nerve cells.
What was that one last one you said? The vitamin D. I take vitamin D. How much do I take?
And phosphate should be reduced in the diet along with the pro-inflammatory fatty acids,
so more carbohydrate and sugar and any good source of calcium and magnesium,
milk, cheese, green vegetables, well cooked, but less beans, nuts, and meat
because of their high phosphate content. So testosterone will be first and foremost in
terms of what Dr. Peat said about its neuroprotective effects and for males very
importantly and not so difficult to achieve. In terms of Dr. Peat's recommendations for
light weight-bearing exercise would be the best way to improve your general testosterone as a
male. Obviously avoiding the estrogenic substances is another no-brainer because estrogen directly
antagonizes testosterone and so to avoid all of the polyunsaturates in the diet. Obviously,
there's things from plastics interfering with hormones, etc., causing xenoestrogenic effects.
So the food that you eat, you need to be careful, nuts, beans, and seeds to avoid those from the
polyunsaturated perspective and then to either use thyroid hormone if you are low thyroid and
you can check that with your temperature impulses and also things like aspirin,
good anti-inflammatories for reducing generalized inflammation. And fibrous foods because they
help to reduce the reabsorption of estrogen in the intestine and because Parkinson's
almost always involves sluggish intestinal movement. Constipation, yeah, there you go.
Okay, so did you get that list? Yeah, let's see, vitamin D, testosterone,
DHA, thyroid hormone, making sure you're getting enough sugars in your diet, making sure your
bowels are working, you know, you're not constipated or clearing up any constipation
that you have because you can reabsorb estrogen from the bowel. All of those pro-testosterone
things, pro-energy things and anti-estrogenic and inflammatory mediated in the causative
substances like the PUFA, the polyunsaturates in the food chain. Yeah, okay, all right. Well,
if you need any other questions, we've got at the end of the show, I'll give out the best way to
contact myself and how to find Dr. Peat's articles. I'm sure, in fact, I know there are a couple of
articles on Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and those kind of neurodegenerative processes that you could
go ahead and read. So call it, we have another call on the air. So let's take this call away
from what's your question? I'm dealing with peripheral neuropathy in my feet, caused by
chemotherapy. And I'm wondering, you were talking about less estrogen producing foods and
more testosterone. Anyway, if you could save the list of things to avoid,
or if there's a way to get that, I would be very grateful. Because it is an inflammation
at an incredible level. It's very, very, very painful. And I've been taking some pain pills
when I just can't stand, I can't stand taking the pills and I can't stand the pain.
Anything you could do that might mitigate or suggest that might mitigate the inflammation
would be great. Okay, so Dr. Peat, peripheral neuropathy post chemotherapy.
The nerve regeneration, peripheral as well as central, there have been many studies in animals
showing that vitamin D and progesterone work together to restore nerves. I think it's a good
idea to have a blood test for both vitamin D and progesterone and keep the vitamin D
at least in the middle of the normal range, 50 nanograms per milliliter is good, 50 or 60.
And progesterone should be in the luteal range, even for postmenopausal women is good to
supplement it if it isn't naturally detectable. And this is because it's directly opposing
estrogen. Yeah, and the serum tests for estrogen are meaningful if you don't have a good amount of
progesterone because after menopause, estrogen begins forming inside cells all through the body,
fat cells, skin cells, breast, uterine cells, everywhere that you don't want it, it can be
formed from adrenal precursors and the anti-inflammatory things, aspirin, progesterone
and thyroid, vitamin D and the calcium in the diet all help to minimize that inflammatory
process of spontaneously forming estrogen in the tissues. Okay, aspirin, vitamin D,
progesterone, thyroid hormone, I've taken that since I was in ninth grade. Which thyroid hormone?
Yes, and my thyroid organ, it doesn't function. Are you taking Synthroid?
I am taking Synthroid. Yeah, I've talked to a lot of people who just get no benefit whatsoever
from Synthroid. I think it's a very... They can test it in my blood, for all the good that does.
You can see it in your blood, but you've got to convert it yourself too to active hormone,
which is sometimes a problem for people. But I just found a lot of people who I've spoken with
very disappointed with any approach that Synthroid has taken them in. And there are other alternatives.
I know that Dr. Peat's mentioned alternatives to it and both the active form of T3 as well as...
Where does that come from? Where do you get that?
Well, typically, you can go to your doctor and ask for a synthetic T3. If you are diagnosed
hypothyroid, there shouldn't be any problem with that. If you have an understanding doctor who,
despite whatever levels you would have on a blood test, that would seem to show that you are treated
and you have been treated and it seems to be within the range. If you've still got clinical
symptoms of hypothyroidism, which are legion from...
I've got them.
All of it. Yeah. You probably know...
My whole life.
Yeah, exactly.
The active thyroid hormone T3 is itself directly anti-inflammatory. But even the Synthroid, it
does have the good function of suppressing TSH. So if you are taking enough to keep your TSH
close to zero, that has an anti-inflammatory effect. But the main anti-inflammatory
action of thyroid is through the T3.
I think my body has a problem with uptake. I think that that's always been a problem for me.
And I don't have any of the organs that produce estrogen.
Avoiding polyunsaturated fat is very important because it blocks the activation of thyroid
into T3.
I've never subscribed to that. I always thought butter was probably better.
Good.
Also with the... I'm interested in the iodine.
Okay.
I mentioned earlier that a 7% iodine, I'd used it topically on two lesions on my forearms,
and both of which one took significantly longer time than the other. But I'd had
the one that took significantly longer, I'd had it longer.
I'd had it probably for the best part of three years. And every summer I'd look at it and just
be a little bit more concerned because it was just getting a little bigger and a little bit more
scary and was very much activated by sunlight exposure.
Whereas the one on the other forearm, I'd just seen it last year.
So that one cleared up the quickest. That cleared up in about 35 days, 40 days.
And the one on my other arm took about 65 days, I think it was.
And you just put iodine on?
Yeah, it's a 7% iodine. So you can get one...
Are you talking about the gray kind of grainy?
No, no, no. It's a liquid.
It's...
On your arm?
Yeah, yeah. It was a raised kind of gray, white, pearly...
I think I have one. I'm on my way to Rite Aid.
And you said Curiderm?
Curiderm, yeah.
Does it end in an N or an M?
M, as in derm. Your skin. Your dermal layer. Dermatitis. Dermatology.
Okay, yeah.
I want to thank you very much. I will try these things.
Yeah. And I'll give out Dr. Peat's information at the end of the show,
and you can go ahead and read his articles, which you'll find very interesting.
This has been so informative. It's the first time I've heard anything that even remotely.
Well, there you go, Dr. Peat. You see, we've been doing this for 10 years now,
and there's still people that probably never heard you.
I've only been here for a few years, and I don't always...
Okay.
Anyway, thank you.
Yeah, you're welcome. You're welcome.
Okay. So, Dr. Peat, I was going to ask you what you would describe
as an anti-inflammatory dietary lifestyle, but I mean, you've already mentioned it.
Those things that you constantly...
And I won't say constantly in a negative way, but you repeatedly highlight the fact that
both aspirin, progesterone, thyroid, vitamin D, and calcium
are important anti-inflammatory components of a healthy lifestyle.
And other things that people often neglect are getting sunlight as much as possible
and doing things that are fun. You've heard of the enriched environment,
rat experiments that made their brains not only more intelligent, but also bigger.
That kind of entertaining environment causes rats to produce more progesterone
and to have lower estrogen.
So just doing things that are fun and interesting,
keep your hormones in the right direction.
Yeah, it's another reminder for folks out there listening to this right now that
that whole subject of which we have done several shows on environmental enrichment
has been backed up by lots of animal studies that have shown categorically,
you know, like the four swimming test and other tests of endurance that the rats
that just know no escape just fail and die quickly, whereas the other rats
that are given a bit of a chance, you know, they just, they make it.
And the whole thing about environmental enrichment, doing something you enjoy, folks,
I mean, life's work, there's no doubt about it.
I do a lot of work. So I'm totally up for some social and environmental enrichment.
And I try to get it. I mean, sure, I have a garden and I like to walk to work.
And I do get that. So I'm very lucky.
But I think people out there who perhaps feel entrapped by their jobs or entrapped
by their situation need to get outside of themselves as much as they can.
And even if it just means stepping outside the door and just looking up at the sky,
you know, there's things like that that you can do.
Just give yourself a few moments and don't forget to breathe.
And it's an old Buddhist saying, don't forget to breathe.
But I think it's been such a busy state in our life these days,
and it seems to be getting busier and busier.
And Dr. Peat will attest to that.
Speaking of breathing, I should mention that one of the main effects of taking thyroid
or having a good thyroid function is producing carbon dioxide.
So you don't want to over breathe.
Right. Well, good on that note.
Let's give give out your information.
And I will quickly mention something that I feel led to talk about, which is a very strange guy.
It seems to be doing the impossible.
Wim Ho, you can check him out on the Internet.
I would not advocate what he does or the reason by which he does what he does.
But over breathing is something he ascribes to,
which is completely the opposite philosophy to Dr. Peat.
But anyway, for those people that have listened tonight
and for those people that have called in, thank you for your questions.
Dr. Peat's website is raypeat.com.
He's got at least 50, if not more, articles that are fully referenced on many different
conditions, pathologies, states of mind, being well worth reading.
It's quite heavy.
Some of it is very scientific, but he's also very approachable, too.
I think he's still possibly approachable.
I don't know where he gets the time from, but and we can also be reached
1-888-WBM-ERB or on the Internet at westernbotanicalmedicine.com.
I want to just say again, it's April 2019.
We will have an Instagram page dedicated to Dr. Peat's work from A to Z,
and it will be from the horse's mouth.
I won't add to it or take away.